Definition:- 
      A graph can be defined as group of vertices and edges that are used to connect these vertices. A graph can be seen as a cyclic tree, where the vertices (Nodes) maintain any complex relationship among them instead of having parent child relationship. A graph G can be defined as an ordered set G(V, E) where V(G) represents the set of vertices and E(G) represents the set of edges which are used to connect these vertices.

Components of a Graph:-

1). Vertices: Vertices are the fundamental units of the graph. Sometimes, vertices are also known as vertex or nodes. Every node/vertex can be labeled or unlabelled.

2). Edges: Edges are drawn or used to connect two nodes of the graph. It can be ordered pair of nodes in a directed graph. Edges can connect any two nodes in any possible way. There are no rules. Sometimes, edges are also known as arcs. Every edge can be labelled/unlabelled.

Types Of Graph:- 

1. Null Graph:
        A graph is known as a null graph if there are no edges in the graph.

2. Trivial Graph:
       Graph having only a single vertex, it is also the smallest graph possible.

3. Undirected Graph:
      A graph in which edges do not have any direction. That is the nodes are unordered pairs in the definition of every edge. 

4. Directed Graph:
     A graph in which edge has direction. That is the nodes are ordered pairs in the definition of every edge.

5. Connected Graph:
    The graph in which from one node we can visit any other node in the graph is known as a connected graph. 

6. Disconnected Graph:
    The graph in which at least one node is not reachable from a node is known as a disconnected graph.

7. Regular Graph:
    The graph in which the degree of every vertex is equal to K is called K regular graph.

8. Complete Graph:
     The graph in which from each node there is an edge to each other node.

9. Weighted Graph:
     A graph in which the edges are already specified with suitable weight is known as a weighted graph. Weighted graphs can be further classified as directed weighted graphs and undirected weighted graphs.

Basic Operations on Graphs:

1). Insertion of Nodes/Edges in the graph – Insert a node into the graph.
2). Deletion of Nodes/Edges in the graph – Delete a node from the graph.
3). Searching on Graphs – Search an entity in the graph.
4). Traversal of Graphs – Traversing all the nodes in the graph.

